
--- Page 1 ---
Duke University Press
Chapter Title: introduction: on Asian Americanist critique
Book Title: Imagine Otherwise
Book Subtitle: On Asian Americanist Critique
Book Author(s): Kandice Chuh
Published by: Duke University Press. (2003)
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctv11cw6nw.4
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Duke University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Imagine Otherwise
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 2 ---
introduction:
on Asian Americanist critique
Asian American culture is the site of more than critical negation of
the U.S. nation; it is a site that shifts and marks alternatives to the
national terrain by occupying other spaces, imagining diperent
narratives and critical historiographies, and enacting practices that
give rise to new forms of subjectivity and new ways of questioning
the government of human life by the national state.—Lisa Lowe,
Immigrant Acts: On Asian American Cultural Politics (1996)
Justice remains, is yet, to come. Perhaps, one must always say for
justice.—Jacques Derrida, ‘‘Force of Law’’ (1992)
We need to remember as intellectuals that the battles we fight are
battles of words. . . . What academic intellectuals must confront is thus
not their ‘‘victimization’’ by society at large (or their victimization-in-
solidarity-with-the-oppressed), but the power, wealth, and privilege
that ironically accumulate from their ‘‘oppositional’’ viewpoint, and
the widening gap between the professed contents of their words
and the upward mobility they gain from such words.
—Rey Chow, Writing Diaspora (1993)
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 3 ---
2 imagine otherwise
The Hawai‘i of Lois Ann Yamanaka’s novel, Blu’s Hanging (1997), is anything
but paradisical. Filled with poverty and meanness, with violence and un-
certain futures for the Ogata children who anchor the novel, Blu’s Hanging
directly challenges edenic images of the islands. It is indeed a challenging
book on many fronts, depicting as it does vivid accounts of child abuse
entwined with cruelty to animals, and culminating in the rape of the
novel’s eponymous character. And it does so in a lyrical prose that under-
scores the intolerability of the situation presented by juxtaposing poetics
with violation.
In some perhaps perverse sense, it seems fitting that this themati-
cally provocative novel should have animated the intense discussions that
reached a climax at the Association for Asian American Studies’ 1998
Annual Conference, held in Honolulu, Hawai‘i. Practitioners of Asian
American studies will no doubt be familiar with the controversy surround-
ing the novel. Briefly, criticized for its putatively racist representations of
Filipino Americans, the novel’s naming as Best Fiction by the association
incited impassioned debate that led ultimately to the rescinding of the
award and concomitant en masse resignation of the association’s executive
board.b For many, the awarding of this prize to Blu’s Hanging signified the
validation of racist representations by the Association itself, charges espe-
cially troubling for an organization in a field that emerged in large part
precisely to counter racism. Perhaps for all, it provoked debate regarding
freedom of artistic expression and critical evaluation—a thematization of
the relationships between politics and aesthetics forwarded by this kind of
association and award. In one sense, this controversy functioned as a cruci-
ble for testing the politics and practices of the association and its member-
ship, dramatically highlighting marginalization and exclusionary knowl-
edge politics within Asian American studies. And certainly, though these
events are contemporary, these issues are not. They have circulated in the
field since its inception in the 1960s and 1970s, as the grounding assump-
tions of to whom and to what ‘‘Asian American’’ refers, of the nature and
constitution of the object of knowledge of Asian American studies, have
faced repeated interrogation. Criticized for its homogenization of peoples,
artifacts, and histories, and for its sometime deployment with masculinist
and heteronormative biases and tacit East Asian orientation, ‘‘Asian Ameri-
can’’ as a term of criticism has never functioned as a label free of dispute.
Through this controversy, perhaps because it seemed that the future of the
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 4 ---
introduction 3
association—one of the relatively few institutional sites for Asian American
studies—was in jeopardy, attending critically to marginalization has gained
a sense of field-wide immediacy.
In the aftermath of these events, as the association has rebuilt itself and
many have attempted to apprehend their precipitating conditions, that
multiple issues of concern for Asian American studies collided around the
award has become evident. In retrospect, allegations of marginalization
seem to have referred not only to biases in terminology and critical prac-
tice, but obliquely to the very orientation of the field as well: Activist or
academic? Practical or theoretical? Had the association, the field, become
too institutionalized, cut op from not only its membership, but also and
maybe more importantly, ‘‘the community’’? Had it lost, through that
disconnection, a clear sense of how to conduct antiracist work?
Such questions arise at a time when discourses like transnationalism and
postcolonialism solicit examination of the implicit framing principles of
nation-based fields like Asian American studies. Propounding, or at least
auguring, the end of the dominance of the nation-state as the preeminent
unit of global organization, transnationalism recognizes contemporary
flows of capital and information that seemingly find national borders irrel-
evant and ‘‘patriotic’’ loyalties displaced from nation-states to diperently
configured collectivities. It suggests that it is no longer clear—if it ever
was—that the subject (‘‘American’’) is a discretely bounded, discretely
knowable entity merely modified by a specific adjective (‘‘Asian’’). Postco-
lonial studies, too, has mounted its own interrogations of the nation-state
form, especially regarding its viability as a site of post-colonial liberation.
Although with an emphasis on European colonialisms and their conse-
quences in Asia and Africa, postcolonialism in the U.S. academy has of late
become increasingly important to illuminating U.S. practices of empire.
The critiques of modernity emergent under the rubric of postcolonial
studies both inform and compel investigation of the U.S. nation-state, the
putative and self-proclaimed representative of the achievement of moder-
nity’s principles of the Rule of Law, Democracy, and Equality. The already
complex matter of understanding the position of U.S. racialized minorities
is further complicated by recognizing the United States as an imperial
metropole. I wonder, in hindsight, if the award controversy did not perhaps
find especially fertile ground in light of these broad-based incitements to
rearticulate the field.
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 5 ---
4 imagine otherwise
Imagine Otherwise undertakes a critical consideration of Asian American
studies, motivated in part by questions that arose through the award con-
troversy, questions that give added impetus to revisit its framing assump-
tions in light of critiques of the (U.S.) nation-state emergent through post-
colonial and transnational studies. I mean to ask after the coherency and
object(ive)s of Asian American studies and to understand its work as both
an academic field and an explicitly political project. I take the award contro-
versy as my point of departure because it brings into sharp relief the
significant diperences too easily elided by the rubric ‘‘Asian American,’’
diperences both enumerated and complicated in part through the critiques
mounted by postcolonial and transnational theorizing. Asian Americanists
continue to search for ways to negotiate such diperences so that the field
can remain a politicized tool for social justice; this book attempts to con-
tribute to such a project. My focus, in working through Asian American
literatures toward that end, results from working in both Asian American
studies and U.S. American literary studies as my two primary field loca-
tions. What motivates ‘‘Asian American’’ in the face of infinite hetero-
geneity among its referents? What does it mean to be a practitioner of Asian
American studies when the anchoring terms—‘‘Asian’’ and ‘‘American’’—
seem so fatally unstable? Does field coherency depend on political con-
sensus, and, if so, what are the terms of those politics? What are the
connections between the political and the literary? Is ‘‘Asian American’’
literature to be read/evaluated somehow diperently from ‘‘American liter-
ature,’’ and if so, how?
These questions animate Imagine Otherwise. In their interrogations of refer-
entiality and calls for reflexivity in discourse and politics, they register this
book’s engagement with poststructural theorizing and its influence on the
contemporary U.S. academic scene. Investigation of the currency and intel-
ligibility of ‘‘Asian American’’ occasions scrutiny of that influence as an
exigent condition of contemporary knowledge production. Arguably inau-
gurated by Ferdinand de Saussure’s theorization of the arbitrary nature of
the linguistic sign in the opening decades of the twentieth century, post-
structuralism’s radical destabilization of fixity and transparency in language
has been manifested in what is often understood as the postmodern phe-
nomenon of the assertion and recognition of the constructedness of ‘‘the
real.’’ That is, under the name of postmodernism, and underwritten by the
social and political movements of the 1960s and 1970s that similarly de-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 6 ---
introduction 5
manded a radical interrogation of authority, poststructuralism’s insights
articulate to a critique of European master narratives of progressive subjec-
tive enlightenment characterizing modernity. And in the U.S. context, that
articulation has conditioned the emergence of multiculturalism, which can
thus be seen as a consequence of challenges to and the unraveling of
structuring meta-narratives.C A paradigm that acknowledges the limitations
of meta-narratives of Identity and History, multiculturalism is often evoked
as justification for fields like Asian American studies. In other words, Asian
American studies may be seen as a formation of the critical landscape con-
figured by a (poststructural) problematization of referentiality, which facil-
itates the (postmodern) jettisoning of the authority of the meta-narrative.
Despite these genealogical links to poststructural theory, Asian American
studies has yet, I believe, to contend thoroughly with their implications.
And at least two reasons for this are immediately apparent. First, the domi-
nant narrative of Asian American studies consistently foregrounds political
activism, especially in the language of community work and social transfor-
mation, an emphasis that derives from its rootedness in the socio-political
movements of the 1960s and 1970s. Student strikes in that era on the
campuses of San Francisco State University and the University of California
at Berkeley compelled the academic institutionalization of Asian American
studies, a process that continues today at various sites around the nation.
The vitality of this narrative, which has in many ways been instrumental to
establishing Asian American studies in institutional locations over the past
three decades, has tended to overshadow other possible narratives of the
field’s emergence.
And second, it is arguably politically suspect to claim or adopt a relation
to poststructuralism, a deeply Eurocentric philosophical tradition that
makes di.cult immediate political intervention by means of its destabiliza-
tion of subjectivity itself.H In undermining the knowability of ‘‘knowl-
edge,’’ poststructural thinking corrodes the authority of the ‘‘knowing’’
subject, whose grounds for action are consequently called into question.
Here, subjectivity is conceived as an unstable construct of repressive/con-
structive orders of knowledge.W Neither ‘‘subject’’ nor ‘‘knowledge’’ has
within this framework immanent authority/validity/stability.
Despite, on the one hand, the value of the political activist narrative of
Asian American studies and, on the other, the questionability of tracing
Asian American studies through poststructuralism, I believe that investigat-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 7 ---
6 imagine otherwise
ing the object(ive)s of Asian American studies in relation to poststructural
theorizing illuminates ways that the field may productively imagine itself
within the contexts and currents of the present historical moment. This is
done in part to enable us fully to contend with the impact of liberal multi-
culturalism, arguably the dominating paradigm of U.S. academic culture
today. Multiculturalism, contradictorily, attempts to retain a liberal concep-
tion of subjectivity while simultaneously claiming to take seriously radical
critiques of precisely the liberal subject. In so doing, it occludes and epaces
the historicity of racism and the deep-rootedness of racialization as a tech-
nology through which the United States, also contradictorily, has perpetu-
ated a self-stylization as the achievement of the universalist Enlightenment
values of equality and liberty. This kind of multiculturalism manages at
once to sediment Asian Americanness in a narrative of otherness that
achieves cohesiveness through an emphasis on (previous) exclusion and
powerlessness, and to erase the continuities of the materialities underwrit-
ing such positions by insisting on the irrelevance of the past.T In light of
these epects, what does recognizing Asian American studies as a formation
of multiculturalism mean in eports to conceive Asian Americanist dis-
course under contemporary historical conditions?
The current moment includes globalized practices of capital that have in-
stituted demographic and immigration patterns in such ways as to prompt
deliberate attention to how the ‘‘national’’ articulates to the ‘‘global.’’ It is
by now commonplace to recognize that globalization has made it an in-
creasingly di.cult task to determine with any certainty what peoples and
cultural practices belong to or originate from where.M Globalization refers
to the transformations of economic, political, and social organization set in
motion by the emergence of transnational capitalist practices, especially
since the 1970s. Unlike the multinational corporations of the previous
iteration of capitalism, transnational corporations are unanchored in a
given nation but rather are highly flexible and mobile in their pursuit of the
locales that will best maximize their accumulation of capital.J Transnational
corporations in fact prompt the development of new nation-specific laws
that serve their interests, a phenomenon that signals the erosion of the
sovereign power of nation-states. Transnational capitalism is a global mode
of production that is globalizing in its attempts to integrate all sectors of the
world economy into its logic of commodification. Class exploitation in
contemporaneous forms, articulated in racialized and gendered diperentia-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 8 ---
introduction 7
tion and layered unevenly across the north/south, first/third world di-
vides, aggressively inscribes this globalized terrain.K Multilateral cultural
and information flows, enabled by contemporary technologies and driven
by jagged relations of power, circulate across this landscape.
The shifts referred to by globalization include the changing economic
significance of the Asia–Pacific region, which has apected the demo-
graphics and subjectivities of Asian-raced peoples in the United States. The
U.S. 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act coincided with the post–World
War II burgeoning strength of Asian economies, a diperence in circum-
stance from earlier conditions that has resulted in a resurgence of immigra-
tion from Asia to the United States. But now, at least in part, no longer are
Asian nations perceived, Eurocentrically, primarily as sources of labor and
raw materials for ‘‘Western’’ capitalism. Rather, some are recognized ex-
porters of capital and are influential nodes in the multilateral trajectories of
transnational capitalism. Accordingly, while an underclass of immigrant
laborers characterizes present as it did past flows of migration to the United
States, today there is also a large professional, managerial class whose
migrations may be multilateral and whose members are not necessarily
interested in formally attaching themselves to the United States by way of
citizenship.
Because the 1965 legislation favored the latter cohort of migrants, the
roughly fivefold increase between 1970 and 1990 in the population of
persons of Asian descent living in the United States has meant dramatic
alterations to ‘‘Asian America’’ along multiple identificatory axes, including
nativity and citizenship. Theorization of subjectivity follows suit, as earlier
models of subject formation face revision to better correlate with this glob-
alized scene. ‘‘Oppression,’’ ‘‘marginalization,’’ and ‘‘resistance,’’ keywords
in dominant narratives of Asian American studies, are terms that each
require redefinition within this globalized context, as ‘‘by whom’’ and
‘‘against what’’ are questions that are increasingly di.cult to answer with
certitude. The uneven power relations and disparate distribution of re-
sources to which these terms refer have not dissolved; rather, they have been
articulated into new forms, necessitating investigation of the ‘‘scattered
hegemonies’’ that characterize the present (Grewal and Kaplan 1994).
This moment too is characterized by discourses like feminism that also
prompt concerted eports to conceptualize subjectivity in ways that priv-
ilege diperence over identity through interrogations of the racialized,
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 9 ---
8 imagine otherwise
gendered, classed, and sexualized ideologies underwriting U.S. national
subjectivity. The convergence of these socio-discursive movements that
critically recognize diversity and those that illuminate the operations and
epects of globalization compels the generation of epistemologies that bear
a renewed sense of the di.culties of defining (much less achieving) justice
given shifting material terrains and the irreducible complexities of life,
culture, and politics., Poststructuralism or, more specifically, a ‘‘decon-
structive attitude’’ contributes to this process by emphasizing the need to
interrogate ‘‘identity-as-such,’’ as R. Radhakrishnan has put it (1996, xxiii).
The maintenance of a deconstructive attitude keeps contingency, irresolu-
tion, and nonequivalence in the foreground of this discourse. Such a stance
helps the interrogation of field coherency in the face of multiple kinds of
diperences, precisely by its emphasis on diperence as anterior to and irre-
solvable in identity.
Recall that deconstruction is neither method nor technique; rather, it is
the state of internal contradiction itself, of the constitutive diperence
within any seemingly stable term (diAérance). ‘‘Asian American,’’ because it is
a term in diAerence from itself—at once making a claim of achieved subjectivity
and referring to the impossibility of that achievement—deconstructs itself,
is itself deconstruction. ‘‘Deconstruction takes place,’’ Jacques Derrida the-
orizes. ‘‘It is an event that does not await the deliberation, consciousness, or
organization of a subject’’ (1988a, 4). In other words, deconstruction is a
state of becoming and undoing in the same moment. ‘‘Asian American’’
is/names racism and resistance, citizenship and its denial, subjectivity and
subjection—at once the becoming and undoing—and, as such, is a designa-
tion of the (im)possibility of justice, where ‘‘justice’’ refers to a state as yet
unexperienced and unrepresentable, one that can only connotatively be
implied. Arguably, the overarching purpose of Asian American studies has
been and continues to be pursuit of this (im)possibility, the pursuit of an as
yet unrealized state of justice by tracing, arguing, and critiquing, and by
alternatively imagining the conditions that inscribe its (im)possibility. Jus-
tice is understood here not as the achievement of a determinate end, but
rather as an endless project of searching out the knowledge and material
apparatuses that extinguish some (Other) life ways and that hoard eco-
nomic and social opportunities only for some.
As the discussion that follows will show, a deconstructive understanding
of ‘‘Asian American’’ emphasizes a necessary reflectiveness of Asian Ameri-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 10 ---
introduction 9
canist discourse upon itself. In part, this serves as an eport to intervene in
multiculturalist ways of subjectifying and conceiving Asian American and
other ethnic studies fields, to work through and against, in other words, the
liberal legacy of negotiating identity and diperence in such a way as to
flatten power relations. But also, this deconstructive attitude attempts to
shift the grounds of intrafield debates about Asian American subjectivity
that seem to resort to some version of identity for intelligibility. To imagine
otherwise is not about imagining as the other, but rather, is about imagin-
ing the other diperently. It is, to borrow from Gayatri Spivak, ‘‘to recognize
agency in others, not simply to comprehend otherness’’ (1997, 473; em-
phasis original). By emphasizing the internal instability of ‘‘Asian Ameri-
can,’’ identity of and as the other—the marginal, the marginalized—is en-
couraged to collapse so that the power relations to which it referred may be
articulated anew, as the basis and epect of an Asian Americanist discourse
grounded in diperence.
I recognize that in interpreting Asian American studies in these particular
ways, I am prioritizing the role of literary studies despite its constitution by
multiple disciplines. Clearly, my own disciplinary biases are in play. At the
same time and not unrelatedly, I will suggest that approaching Asian Amer-
ican studies literarily traces the internal work (the deconstruction) of indi-
vidual disciplines necessary for Asian American studies to work inter-
disciplinarily in more than name alone. And that remains a project of some
significance for Asian American studies, lest its transformative energies be
deflated by cooptation of its practitioners into traditional disciplinary divi-
sions, a point to which I shall later return.
Imagine Otherwise argues that current conditions call for conceiving Asian
American studies as a subjectless discourse. I mean subjectlessness to create the
conceptual space to prioritize diperence by foregrounding the discursive
constructedness of subjectivity. In other words, it points attention to the
constraints on the liberatory potential of the achievement of subjectivity, by
reminding us that a ‘‘subject’’ only becomes recognizable and can act as
such by conforming to certain regulatory matrices. In that sense, a sub-
ject is always also an epistemological object. If Asian Americanists have
mounted sophisticated interrogations of representational objectifications
of Asian-raced peoples in the United States, of dehumanizing images that
a.liate certain object-ive meanings to certain bodies, we have not, I think,
always paid such critical attention to ‘‘Asian Americans’’ and to ‘‘Asian
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 11 ---
10 imagine otherwise
American studies’’ as ‘‘subjects’’ that emerge through epistemological ob-
jectification. Part of the di.culty in doing so results from the powerful
demands of the U.S. nation-state’s celebration of citizenship, or national
subjectivity, held out as ‘‘natural’’ and tantamount to achieved equality and
so long denied to Asian-raced peoples. In spite of claims about the death of
the Subject heralded by postmodernism, the idea and importance of a
consummate subjectivity remains unabashedly vital in the state apparatuses
of the law. As the uniquely authorized discourse of the nation, and in
contrast to the postulation of the modern era that subjects (to monarchal
power) have transformed into consensual citizens (of a nation-state), law
requires subjection/subjectification.bI The centrality of citizenship and
subjectivity to the politics of modernity both motivates and explains Asian
American studies’ central concerns with representation and representa-
tional politics in similar terms. The importance of political/legal subject
status telescopes into the importance of discursive subject status; the meta-
phor of marginalization manifests the distance between these—between,
that is, the ‘‘American’’ and the ‘‘Asian American.’’ And clearly, as long as
the state demands subjectivity and wields its particular kinds of power,
Asian Americanists cannot simply dismiss those terms altogether.
At the same time, and despite how enormously enabling citizenship
continues to be in the garnering of access to certain material resources,
subjectivity itself, alone, cannot remedy injustice. Recognition of the sub-
ject as epistemological object cautions against failing endlessly to put into
question both ‘‘Asian American’’ as the subject/object of Asian American-
ist discourse and of U.S. nationalist ideology, and Asian American studies as
the subject/object of dominant paradigms of the U.S. university. Other-
wise, Asian American studies can too easily fall into working within a
framework, with attendant problematic assumptions of essential identities,
homologous to that through which U.S. nationalism has created and ex-
cluded ‘‘others.’’ Subjectlessness, as a conceptual tool, points to the need to
manufacture ‘‘Asian American’’ situationally. It serves as the ethical grounds
for the political practice of what I would describe as a strategic anti-
essentialism—as, in other words, the common ethos underwriting the
coherency of the field. If we accept a priori that Asian American studies is
subjectless, then rather than looking to complete the category ‘‘Asian
American,’’ to actualize it by such methods as enumerating various compo-
nents of diperences (gender, class, sexuality, religion, and so on), we are
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 12 ---
introduction 11
positioned to critique the epects of the various configurations of power and
knowledge through which the term comes to have meaning. Thinking in
terms of subjectlessness does not occlude the possibility of political action.
Rather, it augurs a redefinition of the political, an investigation into what
‘‘justice’’ might mean and what (whose) ‘‘justice’’ is being pursued.
In the context of a globalized world in which corporate economies are
often larger than nations’ and racialized and gendered class exploitation has
corollary renewed vitality, it may seem that a project such as this, that
emphasizes discursive constructedness and problematizes the possibility of
achieving justice through legal means, moves in the wrong direction. My
vantage point as a U.S. academic and citizen undoubtedly underwrites the
orientation of this argument. At the same time, I think that precisely these
contemporary conditions, including the institutionalized setting of Asian
American studies and its practitioners, warrant reflection on what and how
Asian Americanist discourse can contribute to ways of thinking and pro-
ducing knowledge about identificatory categories and subject formations
that might interrupt the concepts that justify the sustenance of grossly
unjust political and economic practices. Subjectlessness as a discursive
ground for Asian American studies can, I think, help to identify and trace
the shifting positionalities and complicated terrains of U.S. American cul-
ture and politics articulated to a globalized frame, by opening up the field
to account for practices of subjectivity that might not be immediately
visible within, for example, a nation-based representational grid, or one
that emphasizes racialization to the occlusion of other processes of subjec-
tification. It is an approach to conceiving of field coherency that consis-
tently puts the field’s own boundaries into question in an eport to resist
turning into a properly disciplined academic discourse.bb
Though I draw from and speculate that there may be implications of this
argument for other minoritized discourses, I believe this move toward a
subjectless ground is especially important for Asian American studies, given
the uniqueness of the ‘‘Asian/American’’ dynamic. As David Palumbo-Liu
has argued, ‘‘Asian American social subjectivity now vacillates between
whiteness and color,’’ and always, ‘‘its function is . . . to trace a racial
minority’s possibilities for assimilation’’ (1999, 5). Palumbo-Liu uses the
construct ‘‘Asian/American’’ to suggest this function, where, ‘‘[a]s in the
construction ‘and/or,’ . . . the solidus at once instantiates a choice between
two terms, their simultaneous and equal status, and an element of inde-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 13 ---
12 imagine otherwise
cidability’’ (1999, 1). He explains that ‘‘as it once implies both exclusion
and inclusion, ‘Asian/American’ marks both the distinction between ‘Asian’
and ‘American’ and a dynamic, unsettled, and inclusive movement’’ be-
tween them (1999, 1). ‘‘Asia’’ in the U.S. frame neither can be or has been
completely segregated out of the national imagination nor absorbed into
‘‘America’’ such that distinctions do not remain. Modern America has come
into being through mediations of the figure of Asia as a signifier of foreign
nations and interests and as that figure is recognized already to be within
America. The United States has negotiated both the conditions of its inte-
riority (i.e., ‘‘Asians’’ already in residence) and global relations, a double
mode of introjection and projection at work within a field of interplay
between U.S. racial ideology and its economic interests. The irresolution of
the United States’ preoccupation with the ‘‘foreign within’’ manifests in
such figures as the ‘‘model minority.’’ That stereotypical image precisely
bespeaks simultaneous inclusion and exclusion, thus bearing the particular
function of being at once a signifier of assimilative potential and of the
limitations proscribing that possibility. The distinctness of the Asian/
American dynamic suggests ways that ‘‘Asian American,’’ through such
figures as the model minority, may be co-opted in the perpetuation of
injustice. The model minority image stages the competitive divisiveness
that deflects attention from systemic conditions that give rise to diperential
advantage along various identificatory axes (race, gender, class, sexuality,
and so on). Precisely because of the co-optability of the Asian/American
dynamic toward such ends, Asian American studies must mount redoubled
eports to undermine the essentialism and identitarian assumptions through
which such divisiveness proceeds.
The modality of competitive divisiveness registers in the kind of intra-
field dissent that the Yamanaka book award controversy represents. Candace
Fujikane’s (2000) analysis of the controversy and the novel suggests that
Asian American studies has clearly paid insu.cient attention to intra–Asian
American racisms. The counter-charge of censorship mounted in defense
of Yamanaka’s novel, Fujikane argues, covered over anti-Filipino Japanese
racism palpable in the Hawaiian context. The uneven intra–Asian American
positions of dominance and power underscored by her critique and by the
award controversy itself testify to the ways that Asian Americanist discourse
must identify those ideologies and structures that undermine projects of
justice by compelling disunity through competition. I return to this discus-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 14 ---
introduction 13
sion in the following chapters, and most explicitly in chapter 4. For now,
my point is that a turn toward subjectlessness is driven both by recognition
of how ‘‘Asian American’’ can be deployed in the service of conservative
ends, and by the need to appreciate fully intra–Asian American diperence.
Reconstituting Asian American studies in diperence helps us to recog-
nize that Asian Americanist critique must be consistently and insistently
critical of both U.S. nationalism and its apparatuses of power, and of ana-
lytic frameworks that, however unintentionally, homologously reproduce
U.S. nationalism’s promotion of identity over diperence. Part of the ex-
igency underwriting this argument lays in the institutionalized settings of
Asian American studies. The remainder of this introduction maps the term
‘‘Asian American’’ and examines its functions as a marker of ‘‘otherness’’
and as a sign of an academic discourse. That consideration underscores the
importance of recognizing Asian American studies as unfolding within the
spaces of the U.S. university, an institution, in David Lloyd’s words, that
‘‘continues to organize crucial social functions’’ (1998, 15). Within this
particular setting, I suggest, emphasizing the literary, discursive nature of
the term ‘‘Asian American’’ helps make clear the necessity of revising what
counts as ‘‘political’’ in Asian Americanist practices by revising understand-
ing of the status of the subject(s)/object(s) of Asian American studies.
The awareness of contemporary historical and discursive conditions and
the institutionalized location of Asian American studies rehearsed in this
introduction grounds the encounters with the particular ‘‘Asian American’’
formations that focus each respective chapter. We begin in chapter one with
consideration of the ways that the construct ‘‘Filipino America’’ challenges
certain paradigmatic assumptions that have been important to cohering
Asian American studies. As the Yamanaka award controversy dramatized,
the unresolved tension between ‘‘Asian American’’ and ‘‘Filipino Ameri-
can’’ articulates perhaps most immediately the need to reinvent Asian
American studies in diperence. Carlos Bulosan’s America Is in the Heart (1988
[1943]) and Bienvenido Santos’s ‘‘Immigration Blues’’ (1992 [1977]) an-
chor that chapter’s discussion. Building on the growing body of scholar-
ship that speaks to the specificities of ‘‘Filipino America,’’ I argue in that
chapter that one of the implications of critically recognizing such particu-
larity is conceiving ‘‘Asian America’’ as a sexualized sign formed through
the interplay of multiple systems of subjectification, including the non-
equivalent technologies of race, nation, empire, and sexuality. By invit-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 15 ---
14 imagine otherwise
ing us to prioritize sexuality as a way of understanding ‘‘Asian America,’’
Bulosan and Santos help us to understand the limitations of uniform sub-
jectivity as a construct regulating the boundaries both of the U.S. nation and
of Asian American studies.
The arguments opered in chapter 1 are complemented directly by the
discussion constituting chapter 4. There, I reestablish the limitations of a
discourse and politics framed by the paradigms of space and subjectivity
made available through the form of the nation-state. In that chapter, I
extend the consideration of Yamanaka’s Blu’s Hanging begun here and locate
inquiry specifically within the context of Hawaiian history and politics. In
so doing, I demonstrate how the ‘‘postcolonial’’ as an analytic critiques the
borders of Asian American studies in such a way as to identify how Asian
Americanist discourse might resist transformation into a depoliticized in-
strument of hegemonic nationalist pedagogy. Employing the insights gar-
nered through the preceding analyses and echoing in particular the argu-
ments of chapter 1, I ask after what is lost when a text like Yamanaka’s is
evaluated primarily in terms of race and racism, and what broadening the
terms of criticism might do to our understanding of the novel and the
issues raised by it.
Bracketed by these linked discussions, chapters 2 and 3 do the work of
exploring the potential of transnationalism as a discourse that opers alter-
natives to the frame of nation. Anchored by analysis of John Okada’s No-No
Boy (1992 [1957]), a novel ‘‘about’’ Japanese American internment during
World War II, and by examination of Hisaye Yamamoto’s story, ‘‘High-
Heeled Shoes’’ (1998 [1948]), written in the same era, chapter 2 argues
that the transnational as a critical frame in Asian Americanist discourse
rea.rms the importance of maintaining a deconstructive attitude toward
identity in generating and employing paradigms alternative to nation. The
historic deployment of the ‘‘transnation’’ as a means for justifying intern-
ment points to ways that transnationalism may be used to reify specifically
national boundaries through a rea.rmation of the identity of the ‘‘true’’
national subject. In that chapter, I argue that employing the transnational as
an analytic helps us to recognize the undecidability of identity and contributes
to the construction of an Asian American studies geared specifically toward
undermining racial essentialism. Moreover and equally importantly, the
transnational emerges from that discussion as a critical frame attuned to
bringing to surface the practices of life and culture that unfold beneath the
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 16 ---
introduction 15
radar of state power. Okada and, especially, Yamamoto compel us to under-
stand that even or perhaps especially when, as in the historic instance of
internment, the U.S. nation’s power is seemingly near-absolute, life con-
tinues in all of its complexities. Pointing not only to the nation-state’s
power but to its powerlessness as well, the transnational along these lines
functions as a tool for identifying the variegated spaces of the U.S. nation.
Chapter 2’s introduction of space as an axis of analysis translates in
chapter 3 to a concerted focus on the spatial logic of U.S. nationalism and of
Asian American studies. Chapter 3 extends consideration of transnational-
ism and Asian American studies and demonstrates the need to trace deeply
the global contexts within which both national and transnational subjec-
tivities are formed. Driven by the insights of Ronyoung Kim’s Clay Walls
(1987) and Chang-rae Lee’s A Gesture Life (1999), I underscore in chapter 3
the ways that practices of Japanese imperialism participate in producing
‘‘Korean America’’ as a formation that is both national and transnational, as
subjectivities that are demonstrably epects of apparatuses of subjectifica-
tion, which are themselves epects of negotiations of unstable and changing
global power relations. These writers help to illuminate the limitations of a
territorial imagination that cannot account for the transnational dimen-
sions of nationalized subjectivities. In so doing, they prompt us to under-
stand the ways that Asian American studies’ historic definition of itself as
distinctly ‘‘about’’ here can epectively support a colonial epistemology con-
trary to the project of social justice.
This book unfolds largely by means of examining various legal narra-
tives—cases and legislation—in conjunction with literary texts. As I have
already begun to suggest (and as I discuss more fully below), because
debates about the meanings and methods of Asian American studies center
around questions of representation, literary and legal discourse, with
their respective foundational concerns with representation and subjectivity,
prove apposite sites from which to mount this study. I draw from especially
critical race theory legal scholarship and feminist jurisprudential scholar-
ship to understand how U.S. law works upon the assumption of the consen-
sual subject—a subject anterior to politics—an understanding that drives
identity-based models of political activism.bC Consistently, as the discus-
sions in the following chapters demonstrate, the modern subject of U.S. law
does not and ontologically cannot represent, can neither fully stand nor act
for, the racialized ‘‘other.’’ The literary texts considered here schematize an
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 17 ---
16 imagine otherwise
understanding of subjectivity that takes issue with the assumption of mod-
ern subjectivity that the subject precedes politics. Along these lines, Imagine
Otherwise conceives of Asian American literatures and U.S. legal discourse as
functionally theoretical texts. They forward contrasting—though not neces-
sarily directly oppositional—understandings of the nature of normative
truth claims about race, gender, and sexuality as categories of national-
ized/naturalized subjectivity, and about the nature and value of norma-
tivity itself. It is within these theoretical, philosophical, ‘‘disciplinary’’ con-
trasts that this book considers questions of justice; indeed, it is in part from
the spaces of these diperences that the imperative to work interdisciplin-
arily emerges, as I discuss below.
multiculturalism, or, why read literature as theory
If the questions driving Imagine Otherwise arise through reflecting on Asian
American studies, they also engage in ongoing conversations in U.S. Ameri-
can literary studies. Among these, especially persistent and pertinent to this
present project are those that take up the position of ‘‘minority’’ literatures
(the ‘‘multicultural problem’’) and the place of ‘‘theory’’ (the ‘‘theory
problem,’’ which is also the problem of the ‘‘literary’’). The multicultural
problem has particular visibility in relation to canonicity and curriculum,
and multiculturalism often serves as putative solution. The racialized, sex-
ualized, gendered character of debates over what gets taught, by whom,
and how is easily recognized.bH It will no doubt be familiar to those who
work with such texts that within that frame, minoritized literatures tend to
be coded as ‘‘(multi)cultural.’’ Meanwhile, the ‘‘literary’’ is reserved for
canonical writers and texts. This solution to the multicultural problem
retrenches a divide between ‘‘high’’ (literary) and ‘‘low’’ (minority) cul-
ture, epectively racializing the idea of culture itself. It thus exemplifies what
Rey Chow has described as ‘‘an institutionalization of racialization of intel-
lectual labor . . . resulting in an aristocracy and a subordinate class in terms
of the production and dissemination of ‘knowledge’’’ (1998a, xvi). Dis-
missively referred to as a symptom of identity politics or political correct-
ness, this kind of logic minoritizes (re-racializes and re-hierarchizes) even
as it ‘‘celebrates diversity.’’ It reduces the rationale for opering courses like
Asian American Literature to a matter of demographics (as in, ‘‘X percent-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 18 ---
introduction 17
age of students on this campus are of Asian descent, and, therefore, Asian
American Literature’’).
This version of multiculturalism is recognizably, as Minoo Moallem and
Iain Boal have argued, a ‘‘multicultural nationalism,’’ an iteration of liberal
ideology that ‘‘operates on the fault line between a universalism based on
the notion of an abstract citizenship that at the same time systematically
produces sexualized, gendered, and racialized bodies, and particularistic
claims for recognition and justice by minoritized groups’’ (1999, 245).
Inasmuch as the modern (U.S.) university is tasked with producing citizens
vis-à-vis multicultural nationalism, eports within the academy to prioritize
and protect diperence must negotiate structural elements designed to her-
ald the possibilities and promises of abstracted citizenship. As David Lloyd
cogently explains:
The [U.S.] university is modeled . . . on a European system that promoted not
so much a mono-ethnic culture as . . . a universalist culture which, though
mediated through national diperentiations, is assumed to supercede local or
ethnic values or knowledges. The disciplinary structure of the university fur-
ther reinforces this model by dividing the sciences from the humanities and
from the social sciences, a division that corresponds to a postenlightenment
(that is, Western and modern) division of a universal human reason into
‘‘faculties,’’ and in turn into the larger diperentiation of spheres of practice
within Western society: the technological/economic, the political, and the
cultural. The disciplinary as well as the curricular structure of the university is
profoundly ‘‘Western’’ and conforms in all respects to the West’s notions of
modernity, academic objectivity, relevance, and hierarchy of bodies of knowl-
edge. (1998, 20)
Debates about canonicity and curriculum in relation to multicultural liter-
ary studies in this sense are symptomatic of the structural barriers to attend-
ing to diperence in light of the university’s liberal mission to abstract and
universalize. ‘‘Ethnic and minority positions as such always emerge in
diperential relation to the unifying tendencies of the state and its appara-
tuses, and this diperential formation of positions produces the contradic-
tions in which the pluralist model founders: the plures out of which the unum
should emerge are in fact constitutively, not merely accidentally, antagonis-
tic to it’’ (Lloyd 1998, 21). Lloyd argues the need to work proactively to
change the structure of the university as part of a far-reaching project of
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 19 ---
18 imagine otherwise
investigating modern political subjectivity. Such an insight, though perhaps
implicitly, drives the interdisciplinary focus of fields like Asian American
studies, a point to which I shall later return. Articulated specifically to the
parameters of American literary study, it also, I think, requires resistance to
the return of referentiality that characterizes the sedimentation of ‘‘multi-
cultural literatures’’ as expressions of ‘‘other’’ cultures. For the multi-
culturalism enabled by the poststructural/postmodern undoing of Author-
ity articulates to the structural economies of the U.S. university in such a
way as to promote a version of otherness, as the identity of the other,
against which Asian Americanists must work.
The constitutive antagonism to which Lloyd refers in other words plays
out in the failure of U.S. multiculturalism to allow for the complexity of
‘‘ethnic literatures,’’ which are epectively coded as transparent, self-evident
expressions.bW Such a positioning obviously makes di.cult an engagement
with minoritized literatures as anything other than (‘‘authentic’’) arti-
facts of an ethnography of the Other. Otherness, here, appears principally
as an idea, one devoid of the contradictions and complexities that in-
scribe and describe people’s lives.bT In other words, an already determined
idea, a predetermined ideal, of minoritized cultures, of otherness, predi-
cates acceptable versions of alterity. Importantly, the idea/ideal of other-
ness animating U.S. multiculturalism enables what Rey Chow has termed
‘‘self-subalternization’’ (1993): since this multiculturalism is a model of
sameness-in-diperence, then anyone and everyone is an other. This in-
cludes not only the assertion of the sameness of ‘‘white’’ and ‘‘non-white’’
(or ‘‘multicultural’’), but also of researcher/scholar and subject. Within
this scheme, the other is no longer oppositional, but simply another, and
the researcher/scholar’s privileged and empowered position is quickly
epaced. The conservative epect of this resolution of the multicultural prob-
lem precisely registers in the racialized distinction between the literary and
the multicultural.
One way of challenging this flattening of otherness into otherness-as-
the-same may be to appropriate and redirect the logic of multiculturalism
by introducing a third term, ‘‘theory.’’ That is, if the literary (through
multiculturalism’s logic) excludes the multicultural, and if theory puta-
tively excludes the literary, then we might write Asian American literatures
into the space of theory itself. Theory, to borrow from Jonathan Culler,
names works that ‘‘exceed the disciplinary framework within which they
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 20 ---
introduction 19
would normally be evaluated and which would help to identify their solid
contributions to knowledge’’ (1982, 9). Asian American literatures’ exces-
siveness, its uncontainment by the literary, dramatizes this definition.
Moreover, conceiving of Asian American literatures as theory recognizes
that, as Barbara Christian has explained, ‘‘people of color have always
theorized—but in forms quite diperent from the Western form of abstract
logic. And I am inclined to say that our theorizing . . . is often in narrative
forms, in the stories we create, in riddles and proverbs, in the play with
language’’ (1990, 38). Theorization by ‘‘people of color’’ in literary forms
displaces the question of the relevance of theory to literary studies: Insofar
as ‘‘people of color’’ and ‘‘Asian American’’ are designations of racial for-
mations, this theorization, following Michael Omi and Howard Winant
(1994), is interested and invested in the socio-historical apparatuses and
processes through which racial categories are manufactured and signified.
The material embeddedness of cultural expressions (‘‘theory’’) emergent
from positions of subjugated alterity re-injects power into the equation,
creating a disequilibrium that unsettles sameness-in-diperence. This move
of defining Asian American literature as theory potentially epects both the
disruption of the multiculturalist sedimentation of Asian American and
other minoritized literatures as seemingly transparent vehicles of authentic
otherness, and the unbounding of ‘‘theory.’’ As Donald Goellnicht explains,
it is ‘‘to appropriate to Asian American texts the power usually reserved . . .
[for] what metropolitan Europeans and Americans at the center of aca-
demic power write’’ (1997, 341). Christian and Goellnicht remind us that
the politics of knowledge that gives rise to such categorical divisions is a
racialized politics, a locus of struggle over racialized power.bM
This (re)definition of Asian American literatures prompts a reconcep-
tualization of culture, from something one has either by nature (for ‘‘the
multicultural’’ or ‘‘ethnic’’) or refinement (for ‘‘the literary’’), to that
which is a site in which the a.liation of meaning to individuals, ide-
ologies, and social structures occurs in negotiation with the material condi-
tions of existence shaped by politics and economics.bJ That is, in contrast to
understanding ‘‘culture’’ as a referent of multicultural diperence, and ‘‘cul-
ture’’ as a signifier of achievement (‘‘high culture’’), here culture is under-
stood as the locus in which signification has a material life. Asian American
literatures stand as the material traces of such practices of signification.
From that vantage point, they oper a theory of the materiality and partiality
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 21 ---
20 imagine otherwise
of knowledge itself. ‘‘Theory oppresses,’’ Trinh Minh-ha reminds, ‘‘when it
wills or perpetuates existing power relations, when it presents itself as a
means to exert authority—the Voice of Knowledge’’ (1989, 42). As the
following chapters will show, the particular Asian American literatures
considered here argue a diperent stance on knowledge by calling for scru-
tinization of the materialities underwriting in particular the authority of
national subjectification as a process of signification—of ‘‘knowing.’’
To be clear, I do not mean to rebound Asian American literatures tightly
as ‘‘theory.’’ Rather, I mean to emphasize the ways that they oper ‘‘theoret-
ical’’ knowledges, where ‘‘theoretical’’ refers in a common parlance sense
to the ‘‘unreal.’’ Weighted by the burden of authenticity, Asian American
literatures seem to have some immanent, ‘‘real’’ meaning to them. Invoking
the term ‘‘theory’’ in this sense is a tactic employed to problematize that
kind of understanding of them. I oper Asian American literatures-as-theory
as a provisional identification designed to undermine its definition as trans-
parently ‘‘multicultural,’’ not in order to reconcretize it.
deconstructing ‘‘Asian American’’/
reconstructing Asian American studies
I have been arguing that unraveling distinctions between literature and
theory may contribute to the project of challenging the hierarchical racial-
ization that epects the subordinate status of Asian American literary studies
in the realm of U.S. American literary studies. That doing so, in other
words, intervenes in the conservative epects of U.S. multiculturalism. The
deconstruction of other distinctions, like those between ‘‘activist’’ and ‘‘ac-
ademic,’’ can help, I will suggest in this section, the broader project of
transforming the work and idea of the university.
‘‘Asian American’’ emerged in the 1960s as a representational sign alter-
native to the predominating image of the forever-foreign, unassimilable
‘‘Oriental’’ through which Asianness in the United States had historically
been coded. With its grammatical assertion of an American identity, activ-
ists of the era put forward the term as part of a cultural nationalist strategy
of ‘‘claiming America.’’bK Gary Okihiro opers an enlightening summary:
‘‘Asians in America, historically and within our time, have been and are
rendered perpetual aliens, strangers in the land of their birth and adoption.
Simultaneously, Orientalism has conflated the diverse ethnicities that con-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 22 ---
introduction 21
stitute Asian America and therewith has exacted similar treatment of and
tribute from those dissimilar groups. Those commonalities—the ties that
bind—arose within the context of the United States. Little wonder that
activists and intellectuals seized upon the United States as the site for con-
testation, to claim as a politicized, pan-Asian people its spaces and its
ideals’’ (1999, 441). Rooted in this cultural nationalism that proclaims a
pan-ethnic unity based on experiential similarity as a strategy of antiracist
activism, ‘‘Asian American’’ has since faced criticism as part of the critique
of such paradigms for their heteronormative and masculinist biases, as well
as their erasure of diversity.b, As the demographic, historical, and experien-
tial diversity among Asians in the United States has proliferated, the di.-
culties of using ‘‘Asian American’’ descriptively have become increasingly
apparent.CI Those who might identify as ‘‘Asian American’’ may be newly
arrived immigrants or have generations-old roots in the United States; they
inhabit the widest range of social and economic and political positions; and
they may refuse the pan-ethnic designation in favor of more or less par-
ticularized terms of identification. Organized around identity, the term
homogenizes diversity such that recognizing ‘‘diperences among’’ frac-
tures its intelligibility. Attempts to resolve fragmentation by pluralizing its
designated referents (as in Asian American literatures and histories), while
successful in indicating multiplicity, appear able only to recognize (as in the
multicultural models discussed above) rather than account for diperence.Cb
Such adjustments, through pluralizing or through expansion, as in
‘‘Asian Pacific Islander American,’’ are clearly corrections designed to en-
hance the term’s accuracy, its reflectiveness as a representational sign. Re-
maining in a descriptive mode, ‘‘Asian American’’ and its various permuta-
tions in this sense serves as a positivist identity category: correcting the
term’s inaccuracies indicates an understanding of the nature of language as
referential, and of identity as more than less stable. This ‘‘Asian American’’
in epect implies a normative subject. Definitional debates along these lines
cannot but end in a dead end, where one either is or is not found to be a
‘‘real’’ Asian American, whether a particular representation is or is not
found to be ‘‘authentic.’’CC Here we might recall that the grounds for de-
ploying ‘‘Asian American’’ are inseparably connected to a history of (ra-
cist/refused) representation both in the literal sense of ‘‘acting for’’ and in
the figurative sense of ‘‘standing for.’’ The parameters of what constitutes
politics itself has productively shifted as a result of these kinds of defini-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 23 ---
22 imagine otherwise
tional debates such that connections between representation and politics
can be more explicitly identified and more readily analyzed. But perhaps
precisely because of this connection between ‘‘acting’’ and ‘‘standing,’’
‘‘Asian American’’ in this regard serves as a unit of a normalizing discourse
not wholly dissimilar from the ways that U.S. legal discourse works to
establish and sustain norms of behavior and identity.
And this is an important connection. For this descriptive ‘‘Asian Ameri-
can’’ works in accord with the civil rights discourses dominating the U.S.
social and political landscape in the 1960s, its moment of generation.
Rights are fundamental units of U.S. jurisprudence and bespeak its rational-
ist, Enlightenment underpinnings. They function upon the assumption of
autonomous individuals who possess rights as a matter of both nature and
social contract, and such possession defines the importance and parameters
of individual autonomy. Justice, within this economy, is derived by pro-
claiming a denial of rights that ‘‘ought’’ to be in one’s possession, by
claiming standing as the implied, proper subject of the law.CH Only by
claiming position as, or identity with, the legal norm can one achieve this
version of justice. This is a situation that has meant for Asian-raced peoples
in the United States the need to claim standing as national subjects, as
deserving of everything from rights to immigration and citizenship to
property ownership and miscegenation—all historically refused to ‘‘orien-
tals.’’CW A persistent domestic focus in Asian Americanist work registers this
legal/political/representational history. As Sau-ling Wong summarizes,
‘‘Asian American studies began with an activist commitment to ‘local’ (as
opposed to ‘homeland,’ i.e., ‘Asians in Asia’) politics; an emphasis on the
experiences of American-born, Anglophone Asians; and a strong anti-
Orientalist agenda that, in extreme cases, led to a studied avoidance of
Asian connections by cultural critics’’ (2001, 135). At the same time that
working in terms of the nation (i.e., working for rights, for example) has
garnered certain forms of ‘‘justice,’’ doing so also plays into myths of
Americanness that cover over the material contradictions of U.S. culture
and politics.
There is a certain contradictoriness, a certain inadequacy, in working
within this hegemonic national paradigm with its attendant celebration of
a rights-endowed subject status (citizenship) as a means to promised free-
dom and justice. In Immigrant Acts: On Asian American Cultural Politics (1996),
Lisa Lowe demonstrates how the racialization of immigrants from Asia has
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 24 ---
introduction 23
been a state technology employed to suture together the conflicting de-
mands of capital and of the U.S. nation-state. In so doing, she argues the
limitations of the liberatory potential of the liberal nation-state form and its
corollary citizen-subject. Lowe limns the ways that capital requires diper-
entiation while the nation-state must unify its members largely through
advancing Enlightenment liberalism’s universal citizen-subject. In this
sense, racialization and universalization are concomitant processes in the
U.S. context, and thus citizenship itself is found to be complicit in the
inequitable distribution of power and resources that results from capitalist
practices. The racialization of Asian immigrant labor has consistently
served, though in varying forms, to cover over this contradiction. Lowe
reminds us that ‘‘the U.S. nation was founded exactly by establishing citi-
zenship as a legal and political category for white male persons that histori-
cally excluded nonwhites and women and that guaranteed the rights of
those male white citizens over nonwhites and women’’ (1996, 27). The
advancement of the concept of citizenship as abstract and universal and
thus accessible to any and all, which is central to American mythology,
precisely disavows this exclusionary history. When recognized, it becomes
impossible to rely on national subjectivity as a means of liberation. At the
same time, it becomes possible to see ‘‘Asian American culture as an alter-
native formation [at a distance from national culture] that produces cul-
tural expressions materially and aesthetically at odds with the resolution of
the citizen in the nation’’ (1996, 6). ‘‘Asian American,’’ in short, cannot
stand as the national subject, nor can it be understood outside the context
of the material conditions of its formation.
And yet, despite such insights, the normalizing valence of a subject-
based definition of ‘‘Asian American’’ continues to circulate, registered in
continuing debates over the academic (‘‘theory’’) versus activist (‘‘prac-
tice’’) orientations of the field and its practitioners. The imperative to artic-
ulate whatever scholarship, whatever critical practices, in the language of
social transformation and political e.cacy, plays out explicitly in these
terms where the standard of value is contribution to community or, more
specifically, to the community. In its inaugural moments, activists and in-
tellectuals were seen as one and the same. Struggles to establish Asian
American studies in universities were part of the eports of ethnic studies
movements generally to democratize the university, and being connected—
‘‘giving back’’—to the community served as controlling ideology. The in-
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 25 ---
24 imagine otherwise
clusion of Asian American studies was to remedy previous exclusion, to
serve as an avenue of access for Asian Americans née orientals. ‘‘Activist’’ is
the privileged term within this context. And while this debate has usefully
focused attention on making and recognizing connections between what
happens within universities and without, it is worth revisiting the under-
lying assumptions about the stability of such terms as community, activism/
practice, and academic/theory. It is perhaps most readily apparent that the idea
of ‘‘the community’’ presents some di.culty in light of the multiple com-
munities in which one might participate or claim belonging and, indeed,
in light of the fact that an ‘‘Asian American community’’ may not be a
readily available formation at all. And as the problems of defining the
community become clear, so too do the di.culties of adjudicating aca-
demic work as activist, of applying the standard of community contribu-
tion in a consistently intelligible way.
In another register, privileging ‘‘practice’’ over ‘‘theory’’ seems especially
troublesome for the ways in which it deploys the selfsame logic that main-
tains the minoritized status of the field. As I discussed above, that distinc-
tion plays into a racialization of intellectual labor. While at first glance a
rejection of ‘‘theory’’ may appear to be a way of undermining such hier-
archization, within the institutionalized setting of Asian American studies, it epectively
enables a return of referentiality, a reification of the idea of Asian American
culture as transcending historical circumstance. Moreover, these terms of
debate occlude recognition of the university as a national-statal institution.
Far from being isolated bastions of abstract knowledge production, univer-
sities are sites of investment for corporate capital and military interest; they
are shaped and sustained by government investments; and in these and
myriad other ways, are precisely Ideological State Apparatuses. And indeed,
this understanding undergirds the motivations of the movements of the
1960s and 1970s that sought to intervene in this particular site. In brief and
crude terms, democratizing the university is in itself a ‘‘real world’’ project,
and refusing the opposition of academic and activist is necessary to keep
this in mind.
This is not unrelated to the ways in which interdisciplinarity might also
help transform the university toward these ends. In recent years, disciplin-
ary diperences have been more explicitly considered as critics have re-
sponded to the imperative to be reflective about analytic methods and
modes, and about the assumption of authority and the meaning of the
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 26 ---
introduction 25
political that accrue to those methods. Michael Omi and Dana Takagi have
summarized that the influence of ‘‘postmodern’’ theorizing in Asian Amer-
ican studies ‘‘has created a curious intellectual divide within the field. On
the one hand are historians and social scientists who vigorously defend
concepts of ‘social structure,’ and on the other are literary and cultural
studies intellectuals who, heavily influenced by postmodern thought, priv-
ilege ‘discursive practices’’’ (1995, xi). And while they are quick to point
out that ‘‘this is a gross characterization of the intellectual diperences in
Asian American Studies,’’ they explain as well that ‘‘while we acknowledge
the artificial, constructed, and continually shifting nature of this divide,
we also feel that the split is real. Moreover, we would argue that it is one
that profoundly apects the work produced and the claims made about it’’
(1995, xi). I agree with their conclusion that ‘‘While claiming to be inter-
disciplinary, the reality is that most of the scholarly work in Asian American
Studies today follows strict disciplinary lines with respect to theory and
method’’ (1995, xiii). This is, as they suggest, arguably a consequence of
the professionalization of the field, including the institutional demands by
tenure and promotion on faculty members, as well as the growth in num-
bers of Asian Americanist practitioners, among whom I count myself,
trained disciplinarily and without the kind of participatory relationship to
the social movements of the inaugural moments of Asian American studies.
Indeed, I would add that many of us are now institutionally located ‘‘east of
California,’’ a commonly used phrase in Asian American studies meant to
indicate the particularities of working outside of California, the historically
dominant site of both practice and research for Asian Americanists. And,
moreover, many are working in settings in which Asian American studies
programs are nonexistent and the very idea of the field is still quite novel if
not dismissed altogether. Many of us, too, are ourselves ‘‘new immigrants,’’
a designation of the cohort of migrants to the United States whose entry
was precipitated by the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act that did
away with the national-origins quota systems that had been in place since
the 1920s and installed new regulatory mechanisms in their place. As
Gayatri Spivak has suggested, this is a pattern of migration motivated by a
desire for ‘‘justice under capitalism,’’ by a desire, that is, to escape the wages
of imperialism, recoded as global capitalism, by, perhaps ironically, re-
moval to the global capitalist ‘‘metropole,’’ the United States. This shared
desire, Spivak argues, ‘‘is what unites the ‘illegal alien’ and the aspiring
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 27 ---
26 imagine otherwise
academic’’ and what should motivate us to ‘‘reinvent this basis as a spring-
board for a teaching that counterpoints these times’’ (1997, 470). There
are no pure positions within ‘‘these times’’ (or ever, one may presume),
and only by ‘‘teaching ourselves and our students to acknowledge our part
and hope in capitalism’’ can we ‘‘bring that hope to a persistent and prin-
cipled crisis’’ (1997, 474).
From Spivak’s suggestion that ‘‘since we are imprisoned in and habituated
to capitalism, we might try to look at the allegory of capitalism not in terms
of capitalism as the source of authoritative reference but in terms of the
constant small failures and interruptions to its logic, which help to recode
it and produce our unity’’ (1997, 483; emphases original), I take a model
for understanding the contradictory position of Asian Americanist work
within the institutionalized site of the U.S. university.CT Within this site, the
concept of interdisciplinarity may serve the project of transforming the
university both by working at the level of struggling for structural changes,
and by working to insist upon the partiality of the knowledges produced by
and logics of any given discipline—by insisting upon the allegorical nature of
the idea of disciplined knowledge. That is, the concept of interdisciplin-
arity may be a way of tracing the deconstruction of individual disciplinary
formations themselves. This task seems especially important given the con-
temporary conditions of dissimilarities in relationships to the history of
Asian American studies and the disparate constraints and ofttimes isolated
locations in which Asian Americanists work. Part of this work must be to
undermine persistently the multicultural, positivist narratives of otherness
that suggest a concrete knowability. That, for me, demands a deconstructive
account of ‘‘Asian American,’’ a move toward embracing the a priori sub-
jectlessness of discourse.
Such an account works to unify Asian American studies by holding the
category ‘‘Asian American’’ under erasure so that its provisional nature and
its constructedness cannot be forgotten. Work like Oscar Campomanes’s
emphasis on the ‘‘categorical act’’ (1992, 1995) and Dana Takagi’s (1996)
articulation of the dipering apparatuses through which racialized and sex-
ualized identities become legible, I understand to function along these
lines. For, both of these are examples of eports to renovate ‘‘Asian Ameri-
can’’ in ways that resist the normativizing impulses of the term as a descrip-
tor. Participating in the broad-ranging de-essentializing projects that have
constituted so much of the academic work undertaken over the past several
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 28 ---
introduction 27
decades, arguments like Campomanes’s and Takagi’s emerge from an un-
derstanding of the (non)referentiality of language that might arguably be
described as deconstructive. This kind of work invokes the inaugurating
impetus of the term as a representational sign. As such, it is arbitrary but
inscribed; it comes to have meaning through and within and as an epect of
specific structures of social/power relations that are themselves ideologi-
cally valenced constructs. ‘‘Asian American’’ in this regard connotes the
violence, exclusion, dislocation, and disenfranchisement that has attended
the codification of certain bodies as, variously, Oriental, yellow, sometimes
brown, inscrutable, devious, always alien. It speaks to the active denial of
personhood to the individuals inhabiting those bodies. At the same time, it
insists on acknowledging the enormous capacity for life that has triumphed
repeatedly over racism’s attempts to dehumanize, over the United States’
juridical attempts to regulate life and culture. ‘‘Asian American’’ provides
entry into these histories of resistance and racism. It transfers the properties
of the racialized and gendered nation onto bodies—of people, of litera-
tures, of fields of study. Far from being a transparent, objective description
of a knowable identity, the term may be conceived as a mediating presence
that links bodies to the knowledge regimes of the U.S. nation. ‘‘Asian
American’’ is in this sense a metaphor for resistance and racism.
There is, in other words, a literariness to the term. ‘‘Asian American,’’ as a
deliberate and self-reflective term of representation, calls attention to the
workings of language, to its structures and functions. It is connotative and
evocative and, in that way, perhaps even poetry in itself.CM There is, indeed,
an aesthetic dimension to it—an inquiry into such matters as beauty and
truth. In this regard, ‘‘Asian American’’ is literary. For this reason, approach-
ing Asian American studies via literary studies may be particularly illu-
minating. My interest here is not in attempting to fix a definition of the
‘‘literary.’’ Rather, it is to direct attention to critical methods and attitudes
that attend to the literariness of ‘‘Asian American.’’ As Jonathan Culler has
suggested, attempts to ‘‘theorize the distinctiveness of literary language or
the distinctiveness of literature’’ have ‘‘always functioned primarily to di-
rect attention to certain aspects of literature. By saying what literature is,
theorists promote the critical methods deemed most pertinent and dismiss
those that neglect what are claimed to be the most basic and distinctive
aspects of literature. . . . To ask ‘what is literature?’ is in epect a way of
arguing about how literature should be studied’’ (2000, 276). Likewise, to
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 29 ---
28 imagine otherwise
underscore the literariness of ‘‘Asian American’’ is to argue for studying the
ways that it aestheticizes and theorizes the social relations and material
conditions underwriting the resistance and racism to which it refers.
As a ground for Asian American studies, what this literary, deconstructive
understanding of ‘‘Asian American’’ does is work against the authoritative-
ness of any seemingly definitive knowledge. Always, it stands as a ‘‘partial
fixation,’’ to borrow from Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Moupe (1985,
112)—a momentary configuration of meaning that is impermanent and
overdetermined. Laclau and Moupe have argued ‘‘the final impossibility of
any stable diperence and thus, of any objectivity’’ (1985, 122) in their
theorization of the possibilities for pursuing a radical democratic practice.
The ‘‘‘experience’ of the limit of all objectivity’’ (1985, 122) they name
‘‘antagonism,’’ which ‘‘constitutes the limits of every objectivity, which is
revealed as partial and precarious objectification’’ (1985, 125; emphasis origi-
nal). The process of objectification, the rules and methods of adjudication
through which objects become ‘‘knowable,’’ emerges as a principle focus of
inquiry, and antagonism might be regarded as a point of entry for that
investigation. This model is helpful to conceiving of Asian American stud-
ies as a field of collaborative antagonisms, collaborative in the doubled sense of
working together and working subversively against, and antagonistic in the
ways in which diverse approaches to knowledge critique and identify each
other’s limits. In this manner, diperence and dissensus are more than sim-
ply acknowledged; they are valued as defining characteristics. The point is
not to work toward resolving diperences, to promote some version of
assimilation, but is instead to insist on the productiveness of dissensus in
demonstrating the impossibility of any objectivity, the irreducible inade-
quacy of any totalizing approach to or disciplining of knowledge. This
conceptualization might displace the centrist metaphor of marginalization
as organizing Asian Americanist knowledge politics, a metaphor organized
by the idea of subject status problematized above. As a field of collaborative
antagonisms, Asian American studies is interested in the irruptions of disci-
plinary formations. It is invested in facilitating those irruptions by empha-
sizing the ways that multiple processes of thematization characterizing
both individual disciplinary practices and the idea of the university as a
whole result in dissimilar subject-epects, the unevenness of which chal-
lenges the universal claims of the modern era/university. I do not mean
this as a utopian celebration of dissensus. As, once again, Spivak has noted,
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
--- Page 30 ---
introduction 29
‘‘diperence and conflict are hard imperatives. Diperence becomes competi-
tion, for we live and participate—even as dissidents—within institutions
anchored in a transnational capitalist economy’’ (1997, 471). For precisely
this reason, they are imperatives, the imagined ethical grounds upon which we
must find ways of uniting.
The chapters that follow elaborate the ideas and argument introduced here.
By this book’s end, I hope it will be clear that Asian American literatures
may be seen to advance understandings of what it means to ‘‘know’’ Amer-
ica that cannot be captured by a subject-driven discourse where subjectivity
bears the legacy of Enlightenment liberalism’s celebration of the nation-
state. These are understandings of the material embeddedness of such
knowledges that limn the possibilities of an Asian American studies that
accounts for diperence through a model of what Avery Gordon (1997) has
described as ‘‘complex personhood’’ rather than multicultural otherness—
that, in short, help us to imagine otherwise in multiple senses.
This content downloaded from 128.112.200.107 on Mon, 26 Jan 2026 21:28:34 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms